Educational Background

Honours Bachelor of Science - Translational and Molecular Medicine |
(September 2019 - April 2023)

University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON

- CGPA: 9.98/10
- Major Research Project Supervisor: Dr. Arvind Mer
- Major Research Project Title: Comparative analysis of drug response
  metrics in patient-derived xenografts

Honours, Scholarships and Awards

NSERC - Undergraduate Student Research Awards (USRA) | (May 2023)

University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON

- Competitive merit-based award. Selection based on academic
  performance, quality of the research proposal, and the research’s
  potential impact.
- One of 88 awards available at the University of Ottawa.
- Valued at $7500 for 3 months

Work in Biomedical Research Scholarship | (May 2022)

University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON

- Competitive merit-based award. Selection based on academic performance
  and the quality of the research proposal.
- Under 50% success rate.
- Valued at $3500 for 3 months

TMM Summer Training program | (May 2022)

University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON

- Competitive merit-based award. Selection based on based on academic
  performance and the quality of the research proposal.
- Valued at $8900 for 3 months.

Undergraduate Research Opportunities (UROP) | (December 2020)

University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON

- Competitive merit-based award. Selection based on academic performance
  and the quality of the research proposal.
- Valued at $1000 for 4 months.

Dean’s Honour List & Merit Scholarship | (September 2019 - April 2023)

University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON

- Merit-based award. Selection based on grade point average (GPA) in
  post-secondary studies.
- Valued at $1000 per term (awarded every term).

Skills

- Experienced in bioinformatics data analysis using R and Python
  programming languages
- Proficiency in developing reproducible bioinformatics pipelines in
  Unix systems with a set of languages such as Bash, Nextflow and Nix.
- Expertise in Multi-omics data analysis, including genomics,
  epigenomics, and transcriptomics.
- Proficient in bioinformatics programming using R and Python
  programming languages
- Expert in developing reproducible bioinformatics workflows across Unix
  and high-performance computing environments.
- Advanced machine learning model development in cancer genomics and
  precision medicine.
- Proficient in data visualization and statistical interpretation of
  complex biological datasets.

Research Experience

Research Assistant - Epigenomics March 2024 - Present

Supervisor: Dr. Arvind Mer (Primary Supervisor) and

Contribution:

- Collaborators: Dr. Ben Tsang, Dr. Gilda Stefanelli, and
  Dr. Jean-Francois Couture.
- Perform epigenomic analysis of clinical exosomal DNA samples to
  identify differentially methylated regions and pathways.
- Created and optimized Cut&Run epigenomic analysis pipeline to explore
  the developmental impacts of neurological conditions in mice.
- Integrated and aggregated multi-omics data from 44 studies and
  databases.
- Performing external validation of the results on public datasets.

Research Assistant - Machine learning May 2023 - February 2024

Supervisor: Dr. Arvind Mer

Contribution:

- Developed machine-learning-based drug response metrics to predict the
  probability of response to anti-cancer medication.
- Compared multiple feature selection methods for drug-response
  prediction machine-learning models to identify the most suitable
  methods for translatable clinical models.
- Applied the machine learning model to predict drug response to
  chemotherapies.
- Visualized the performance differential between machine learning
  models.

Undergraduate Thesis September 2022 - April 2023

Supervisor: Dr. Arvind Mer

Title: Comparative Analysis of Drug Response Metrics for Patient-Derived
Xenograft

Contribution:

- Performed literature review to identify common methods of quantifying
  drug response in patient-derived xenografts (PDX).
- Developed xeMetron package to calculate 250 existing and novel metrics
  for measuring the drug response in PDX.
- Performed biomarker discovery to identify transcriptional markers of
  drug sensitivity in chemotherapies.
- Created machine learning algorithms to predict drug response in
  clinical datasets.

Summer Research Assistant January 2022 - August 2022

Supervisor: Dr. Arvind Mer (Primary Supervisor) and Dr. Damien D’Amours

Title: Large-scale phenogenomic analysis of human cancers uncovers
frequent alterations affecting SMC5/6 complex components in breast
cancer

Contribution:

- Aggregated and combined data from 199 cancer studies to analyze the
  mutational effects of SMC5/6 DNA repair complex in a pan-cancer
  cohort.
- Utilized R programming language to analyze the functional impact of
  SMC5/6 mutation using transcriptomic data.
- Performed cancer phenotype and survival analysis to study the clinical
  implication of SMC5/6.

Student Research Assistant September 2021 - April 2022

Supervisor: Dr. Adam Rudner

Title: Discovery and Characterization of Phage Arzan and Khorshid

Contribution:

- Performed environmental sampling, phage extraction, and phage
  amplification assays.
- Conducted DNA extraction and restriction digest analysis via gel
  electrophoresis.
- Discovered and annotated the genome of two novel phages, Arzan and
  Khorshid.

UROP Research Assistant November 2020 - July 2022

Supervisor: Dr. Jean-Marc Renaud

Title: Role of Adenosine Receptors on Mice Skeletal Muscle Fatigue
Kinetics.

Contribution:

- Designed experiments and set up research equipment for data
  collection.
- Performed experiments on mouse muscles using electrophysiological
  equipment.
- Performed antibody staining, fluorescent imaging, and analysis of
  muscle tissue in the Imiris program.

Publications, Presentations, and Abstracts

Publications

Asare-Werehene, M., Zaker, A., Tripathi, S., Communal, L., Carmona, E.,
Mes-Masson, A., Tsang, B., and Mer, A. (2024). Spotlight on Nuclear
PD-L1 in Ovarian Cancer Chemoresistance: Hidden but Mighty. Cancer
Research (Submitted manuscript in December 2024, currently under
review).

Grégoire, S., Grégoire, J., Yang, Y., Capitani, S., Joshi, M., Sarvan,
S., Zaker, A., Ning, Z., Figeys, D., Ulrich, K., Brunzelle, J. S., Mer,
A., & Couture, J.-F. (2024). Structural insights into an atypical
histone binding mechanism by a PHD finger. Structure, 32(9),
1498-1506.e4.

Wu, G., Zaker, A., Ebrahimi, A., Tripathi, S., & Mer, A. S. (2024).
Text-mining-based feature selection for anticancer drug response
prediction. Bioinformatics Advances, 4(1), vbae047.

Nasser, F., Gaudreau, A., Lubega, S., Zaker, A., Xia, X., Mer, A. S., &
D’Costa, V. M. (2024). Characterization of the diversity of type IV
secretion system-encoding plasmids in Acinetobacter. Emerging Microbes &
Infections, 13(1), 2320929.

Roy, S., Zaker, A., Mer, A., & D’Amours, D. (2023). Large-scale
phenogenomic analysis of human cancers uncovers frequent alterations
affecting SMC5/6 complex components in breast cancer. NAR Cancer, 5(3),
zcad047.

Posters and presentations at scientific meetings

Roy, S., Zaker, A., Mer, A., D’Amours, D. (2023). Large-scale
phenogenomic analysis of human cancers uncovers frequent alterations
affecting SMC5/6 complex components in breast cancer. Canadian Society
for Molecular Biosciences (CSMB) International Conference. Ottawa, ON.
(poster and presentation)

Zaker, A., Mer, A. (2022). Comparative analysis of drug response metrics
in patient-derived xenografts. 4th Annual University of Ottawa Faculty
of Medicine Research Day. Ottawa, ON. (oral presentation)

Friesen, R., Algharbi S., Zaker, A., Mahdi, O., Gao, R., Ferri, O., Li,
J., Wang, SY., HeffernanC., Featherstone, A., Radar, A., Gandelman, M.,
Chander N., Bancud, SE., Rege, I., Shriraam, R., Jung, D., Karunakaran,
G., Sarakbi, R., Znamenski, E., Ristovski, M., Freitas, JD., McCarthy,
L., Williams, EC., D’Ambrosio, L., Chan, K., Wheaton, K., Rudner, AD.
(2022). Investigating Nucleotide-binding Proteins in Bacteriophage
JohnDoe. SEA Symposium. Pittsburgh, PA. (abstract & presentation).

Featherstone, A., Radar, A., Salama, A., Tiukuvaara, S., Ferri, O.,
Zaker, A., Algharbi, S., Mahdi, O., Setia, G., Friesen, R., Wang, GY.,
Li, J., Gao, R., Jung, D., Karunakaran, G., Znamenski, E., Ristovski,
M., Sarakbi, R., Freitas, JD., McCarthy, L., Williams, EC., D’Ambrosio,
L., Wheaton, K., Rudner AD. (2022). Give Us a Millet of Your Time:
Dehusking the Singleton Bacteriophage Arzan. SEA Symposium. Pittsburgh,
PA. (abstract & presentation)

Zaker, A., McCarthy, L., Jung, D., Karunakaran, G., Rudner, A. (2022).
Discovery and characterization of bacteriophage Arzan. Ottawa, ON.
(poster and presentation)

Zaker, A., McRae, C., Renaud, J.M. (2021). Role of Adenosine Receptors
on mice skeletal muscle fatigue kinetics. University of Ottawa UROP
symposium. Ottawa, ON. (abstract and poster).

Software Projects and Repositories

cut_run_pipeline_nix September 2024

- Collaborative project with Dr. Stefanelli lab.
- Developed a pipeline for performing Cut&Run analysis and annotating
  the analysis outcomes.
- Successfully stacked multiple technologies to create a robust
  pipeline.
- Created a user-friendly guide for improving the utility of the
  pipeline for our collaborators.
- Improved the reproducibility of existing pipelines by utilizing Nix
  programming language.

text_features March 2024

- Compared and analyzed the impact of various feature selection methods
  in drug response prediction models.
- Created scripts to be used in high-performance computing environment
  in the cloud and locally.
- Created large-scale visualizations to communicate abstract findings to
  a wide audience.

SMC5-6_complex September, 2023

- Collaborative project with Dr. D’Amours lab.
- Aggregated pan-cancer dataset of over 65,000 patients from across 144
  studies.
- Analyzed the mutational effect of the SMC5/6 protein complex and its
  subunits.
- Performed survival analysis to identify the SMC5/6-related risk
  factors to cancer prognosis.
- Identified large-scale genomic instability associated with SMC5/6
  mutation in patient transcriptome.

vian-clin-sci March 2023

- Reproduced the bioinformatics analysis performed by Viñas et
  al. (2020) .
- Developed a comprehensive report and delivered an in-depth
  presentation of the re-analysis, incorporating detailed visualizations
  and narrative summaries.
- Optimized the analysis outcomes by integrating state-of-the-art
  bioinformatics tools to enhance data resolution and accuracy.

ATG16L1-MYPT1 November 2022

- Collaborative project with Dr. Ryan Russel lab.
- Performed a differential expression analysis of VHL and RB knockout
  mice samples.
- Identified the differentially expressed genes and pathways associated
  with knockouts.
- Verified findings using novel literature text mining tools.
