Educational Background

Honours Bachelor of Science - Translational and Molecular Medicine |
(September 2019 - April 2023)

University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON

-   Major Research Project Supervisor: Dr. Arvind Mer
-   Major Research Project Title: Comparative analysis of drug response
    metrics in patient-derived xenografts

Honours, Scholarships and Awards

NSERC - Undergraduate Student Research Awards (USRA) | (May 2023)

University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON

-   Competitive merit-based award. Selection based on academic
    performance, quality of the research proposal, and the research’s
    potential impact.
-   One of 88 awards available at the University of Ottawa.
-   Valued at $7500 for 3 months

Work in Biomedical Research Scholarship | (May 2022)

University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON

-   Competitive merit-based award. Selection based on academic
    performance and the quality of the research proposal.
-   Under 50% success rate.
-   Valued at $3500 for 3 months

TMM Summer Training program | (May 2022)

University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON

-   Competitive merit-based award. Selection based on based on academic
    performance and the quality of the research proposal.
-   Valued at $8900 for 3 months.

Undergraduate Research Opportunities (UROP) | (December 2020)

University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON

-   Competitive merit-based award. Selection based on academic
    performance and the quality of the research proposal.
-   Valued at $1000 for 4 months.

Dean’s Honour List & Merit Scholarship | (September 2019 - April 2023)

University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON

-   Merit-based award. Selection based on grade point average (GPA) in
    post-secondary studies.
-   Valued at $1000 per term (awarded every term).

Research Experience

Research Assistant | (October 2024 - Present)

Supervisor: Dr. Arvind Mer (Primary Supervisor) and Dr. Ben Tsang

Title: Epigenetic Biomarker Discovery in High-Grade Serous Ovarian
Cancer clinical samples

Contribution:

-   Perform epigenomic analysis of clinical exosomal DNA samples with
    low-coverage bisulfite sequencing.
-   Developed a computational pipeline to identify differentially
    methylated regions and pathways.
-   Performing external validation of the results on public datasets.

Research Assistant | (June 2024 - Present)

Supervisor: Dr. Arvind Mer (Primary Supervisor) and Dr. Gilda Stefanelli

Title: Analyzing the genome-wide distribution of H2AZ histone binding

Contribution:

-   Created and optimized a epigenomic analysis pipeline for Cut&Run
    high throughput studies.
-   Analyzed the functional impacts of H2AZ histone binding pattern in
    DNA through pathway analysis.

Research Assistant | (March 2024 - June 2024)

Supervisor: Dr. Arvind Mer (Primary Supervisor) and Dr. Jean-Francois
Couture

Title: Structural insights into an atypical histone binding mechanism by
a PHD finger

Contribution:

-   Obtained and aggregated CXXC1 mutational data from 44 studies and
    databases.
-   Visualized the mutation frequency across the whole genome and PHD
    domain region.

Research Assistant | (September 2023 - February 2024)

Supervisor: Dr. Arvind Mer

Title: Text-mining-based feature selection for anticancer drug response
prediction

Contribution:

-   Devised multiple feature selection methods for drug-response
    prediction machine-learning models.
-   Trained machine-learning models with varying feature selection
    methods and compared their predictive performance on validation
    datasets.
-   Visualized the performance differential between machine learning
    models.

Research Assistant | (September 2023 - December 2023)

Supervisor: Dr. Arvind Mer (Primary Supervisor) and Dr. Ryan C. Russell

Title: Transcriptomic analysis of RB and VHL knockout in Renal cell
carcinoma.

Contribution:

-   Evaluated the transcriptomic impact of RB and VHL gene knockouts on
    the progression of renal cell carcinoma.
-   Utilized RNASeq data to contract the effectors and targets
    associated with RB and VHL gene knockout, identifying areas of
    convergent molecular perturbation.

Research Assistant | (July 2023 - February 2024)

Supervisor: Dr. Arvind Mer (Primary Supervisor) and Dr. Vanessa M
D’Costa

Title: Characterization of the diversity of type IV secretion
system-encoding plasmids in Acinetobacter

Contribution:

-   Created and optimized a genomic analysis and annotation pipeline of
    the bacterial genome and plasmid using Prokka, Roary and PEPPAN
    tools.
-   Identified major clusters of Type IV secretion systems across 118
    bacterial and plasmid strains.

Summer Research Assistant | (May 2023 - August 2023)

Supervisor: Dr. Arvind Mer

Title: Machine learning methods for drug response prediction in
Patient-Derived Xenograft

Contribution:

-   Developed machine-learning based drug response metrics to predict
    the probability of response to anti-cancer medication.
-   Successfully applied the machine learning model to predict drug
    response to Paclitaxel in human clinical trial data with 95%
    accuracy.
-   Successfully applied the machine learning model to predict the
    overall survival of breast cancer patients in the Cancer Genome
    Atlas Program (TCGA).

Research Assistant | (September 2022 - June 2023)

Supervisor: Dr. Arvind Mer (Primary Supervisor) and Dr. Ryan C. Russell

Title: Analysis of Protein-Protein Interactions to Discover Components
and Regulators of a Novel Autophagy Regulator Complex

Contribution:

-   Designed and co-developed the BiogridMiner package for analyzing and
    curating protein-protein interaction networks for the discovery of
    pathways and complex proteins.
-   Contributed to the discovery of novel autophagy proteins involved in
    the ATG12/5/16 autophagy complex.

Undergraduate Thesis | (September 2022 - April 2023)

Supervisor: Dr. Arvind Mer

Title: Comparative Analysis of Drug Response Metrics for Patient-Derived
Xenograft

Contribution:

-   Performed literature review to identify common methods of
    quantifying drug reseponse in patient-derived xenografts (PDX)
-   Developed xeMetron package to calculate 250 existing and novel drug
    response metrics for measuring the drug response in xenografts.
-   Performed biomarker discovery to identify transcriptional markers of
    drug sensitivity in chemotherapies.

Summer Research Assistant | (May 2022 - August 2022)

Supervisor: Dr. Arvind Mer (Primary Supervisor) and Dr. Damien D’Amours

Title: Large-scale phenogenomic analysis of human cancers uncovers
frequent alterations affecting SMC5/6 complex components in breast
cancer

Contribution:

-   Aggregated and combined data from 199 cancer studies to analyze the
    mutational effects of SMC5/6 DNA repair complex in a pan-cancer
    cohort.
-   Utilized R programming language to analyze the functional impact of
    SMC5/6 mutation using transcriptomic data.
-   Performed cancer phenotype and survival analysis to study the
    clinical implication of SMC5/6.

Student Research Assistant | (March 2022 - September 2024)

Supervisor: Dr. Arvind Mer (Primary Supervisor) and Dr. Greg Silasi

Title: Enhancing mice motor cortex excitability through optogenetic
intermittent theta burst stimulation

Contribution:

-   Co-developing computational algorithms for quantification of
    cortical neural activity and hemodynamics with partner neurology
    lab.
-   Assessing phenomic alterations associated with optogenetic iTBS
    interventions in mouse models.

Student Research Assistant | (January 2022 - April 2022)

Supervisor: Dr. Arvind Mer

Title: Analysis of Drug Response in Patient-Derived Xenografts

Contribution:

-   Created an open-source computational tool (xeMetron) for analyzing
    in vivo cancer drug response.
-   Conducted correlational study between cancer gene biomarkers and
    drug response in patient derived xenograft models.

Student Research Assistant | (September 2021 - April 2022)

Supervisor: Dr. Adam Rudner

Title: Discovery and Characterization of Phage Arzan and Khorshid

Contribution:

-   Performed environmental sampling, phage extraction, and phage
    amplification assays
-   Conducted DNA extraction and restriction digest analysis via gel
    electrophoresis.
-   Discovered and annotated the genome of two novel phages, Arzan and
    Khorshid

UROP Research Assistant | (November 2020 - July 2022)

Supervisor: Dr. Jean-Marc Renaud

Title: Role of Adenosine Receptors on Mice Skeletal Muscle Fatigue
Kinetics.

Contribution:

-   Designed experiments and set up research equipment for data
    collection
-   Performed experiments on mouse muscles using electrophysiological
    equipment
-   Performed antibody staining, fluorescent imaging, and analysis of
    muscle tissue in the Imiris program

Publications, Presentations and Abstracts

Articles (Under review)

Asare-Werehene, M., Zaker, A., Tripathi, S., Communal, L., Carmona, E.,
Mes-Masson, A., Tsang, B., and Mer, A. (2024). Spotlight on Nuclear
PD-L1 in Ovarian Cancer Chemoresistance: Hidden but Mighty. Cancer
Research (Submitted manuscript in December 2024, currently under
review).

Articles (Peer Reviewed)

Couture, JF., Gregoire, S., Gregoire, J., Yidai, Y., Monika, J., Sarvan,
S., Zaker, A., Ulrich, K., Brunzelle, J., Mer, A. (2024). Structural
insights into an atypical histone binding mechanism by a PHD finger.
Structure 32 (9), 1498-1506 (2024). doi:10.1016/j.str.2024.06.017

Wu, G., Zaker, A., Ebrahimi, A., Tripathi, S. & Mer, A. S. (2024).
Text-mining-based feature selection for anticancer drug response
prediction. Bioinformatics Advances 4, vbae047.
doi:10.1093/bioadv/vbae047

Nasser, F., Gaudreau, A., Lubega, S., Zaker, A., D’Costa, VM., Mer, A.
(2024). Characterization of the Diversity of Type IV Secretion
System-encoding Plasmids in Acinetobacter. Emerg Microbes Infect 13 (1),
2320929 (2024). doi:10.1080/22221751.2024.2320929

Roy S., Zaker, A., Mer, A., D’Amours, D. (2023). Large-scale
phenogenomic analysis of human cancers uncovers frequent alterations
affecting SMC5/6 complex components in breast cancer, NAR Cancer 5(3),
zcad047. doi:10.1093/narcan/zcad047.

Posters and presentations at scientific meetings (peer-reviewed)

Roy, S., Zaker, A., Mer, A., D’Amours, D. (2023). Large-scale
phenogenomic analysis of human cancers uncovers frequent alterations
affecting SMC5/6 complex components in breast cancer. Canadian Society
for Molecular Biosciences (CSMB) International Conference. Ottawa, ON.
(poster and presentation)

Zaker, A., Mer, A. (2022). Comparative analysis of drug response metrics
in patient-derived xenografts. 4th Annual Faculty of Medicine Research
Day. Ottawa, ON. (oral presentation)

Friesen, R., Algharbi S., Zaker, A., Mahdi, O., Gao, R., Ferri, O., Li,
J., Wang, SY., HeffernanC., Featherstone, A., Radar, A., Gandelman, M.,
Chander N., Bancud, SE., Rege, I., Shriraam, R., Jung, D., Karunakaran,
G., Sarakbi, R., Znamenski, E., Ristovski, M., Freitas, JD., McCarthy,
L., Williams, EC., D’Ambrosio, L., Chan, K., Wheaton, K., Rudner, AD.
(2022). Investigating Nucleotide-binding Proteins in Bacteriophage
JohnDoe. SEA Symposium. University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.
(abstract and presentation).

Featherstone, A., Radar, A., Salama, A., Tiukuvaara, S., Ferri, O.,
Zaker, A., Algharbi, S., Mahdi, O., Setia, G., Friesen, R., Wang, GY.,
Li, J., Gao, R., Jung, D., Karunakaran, G., Znamenski, E., Ristovski,
M., Sarakbi, R., Freitas, JD., McCarthy, L., Williams, EC., D’Ambrosio,
L., Wheaton, K., Rudner AD. (2022). Give Us a Millet of Your Time:
Dehusking the Singleton Bacteriophage Arzan. SEA Symposium. University
of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA. (abstract and presentation)

Zaker, A., McCarthy, L., Jung, D., Karunakaran, G., Rudner, A. (2022).
Discovery and characterization of bacteriophage Arzan. University of
Ottawa, Ottawa, ON. (poster and presentation)

Zaker, A., McRae, C., Renaud, J.M. (2021). Role of Adenosine Receptors
on mice skeletal muscle fatigue kinetics. UROP symposium. University of
Ottawa, Ottawa, ON. (abstract and poster).
